Datasource docs update, include boot status (#4670)
canonical/cloud-init: doc/rtd/development/datasource_creation.rst

.. _datasource_creation:

Adding cloud-init support to your cloud or platform
***************************************************

The upstream cloud-init project regularly accepts code contributions for new
platforms that wish to support cloud-init.

Ways to add platform support
============================

In order to use cloud-init with a new platform, a couple of approaches
are possible:

1. Provide platform compatibility with one of the existing datasource

>    definitions, such as DatasourceNoCloud.py. Several platforms, including

Reviewer: Should we highlight `DatasourceNoCloud.py` or have it be a link?

.. _datasource_creation:

Supporting your cloud or platform
*********************************

The upstream cloud-init project regularly accepts code contributions for new
platforms that wish to support cloud-init.

Ways to add platform support
============================

In order to use cloud-init with a new platform, a couple of approaches

> are possible:

Reviewer 2: This sounds a bit passive. I'd say "To add cloud-init support for a new platform, there are two possible approaches".

1. Provide platform compatibility with one of the existing datasource
   definitions, such as `nocloud`_ via `DatasourceNoCloud.py`_. Several
   platforms, including `Libvirt`_ and `Proxmox`_ use this approach.
2. Add a new datasource definition to upstream cloud-init. This provides
   tighter integration, a better debugging experience, and more control
   and flexibility of cloud-init's interaction with the datasource. This

>    option is more sensible for clouds that have an unique architecture.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   option is more sensible for clouds that have a unique architecture.
```

Platform requirements
=====================

> There are some technical and logistical requisites that must be met for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are some technical and logistical prerequisites that must be met for
```

cloud-init support.

> Technical Requirements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Technical requirements
```

----------------------

> Cloud-init requires that a cloud be able to identify itself to cloud-init at
> runtime, and that the cloud be able to provide configuration to the
> instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A cloud needs to be able to identify itself to cloud-init at
runtime, and be able to provide configuration to the
instance.
```

A mechanism for self-identification
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each cloud platform must positively identify itself to the guest. This allows
the guest to make educated decisions based on the platform on which it is
running. On the x86 and arm64 architectures, many clouds identify themselves
through `DMI`_ data. For example, Oracle's public cloud provides the string
``'OracleCloud.com'`` in the DMI chassis-asset field.

``Cloud-init``-enabled images produce a log file with details about the
platform. Reading through this log in :file:`/run/cloud-init/ds-identify.log`
may provide the information needed to uniquely identify the platform.
If the log is not present, one can generate the log by running ``ds-identify``
manually.

The mechanism used to identify the platform will be required for
``ds-identify`` and the datasource module sections below.

A mechanism for cloud-init to retrieve configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> There are a few different methods by which cloud-init may retrieve
> cloud-configuration from its platform to configure the instance. The most

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are different methods that cloud-init can use to retrieve
cloud-configuration for configuring the instance. The most
```

common method is a webserver providing configuration over a link-local network.

> Logistical Requirements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Logistical requirements
```

-----------------------

As with any open source project, multiple logistal requirements exist.

Testing access
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> A platform that isn't available for testing is a platform which cannot be
> independently validated. Please provide some means for community members and
> upstream developers to test and verify this platform. Code that cannot be used
> is not code that can be supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A platform that isn't available for testing cannot be independently
validated. You will need to provide some means for community members and
upstream developers to test and verify this platform. Code that cannot be used
cannot be supported.
```

Maintainer support
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> At times a point of contact is required to answer questions and occasionally
> provide testing or maintenance support. Maintainership is relatively informal,
> but please note that there is expectation that from time to time upstream may
> need to contact a the maintainer with inquiries. Datasources which are believed
> to be unmaintained and unused may at some point in the future be considered for
> removal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A point of contact is required who can answer questions and occasionally
provide testing or maintenance support. Maintainership is relatively informal,
but there is an expectation that from time to time upstream may
need to contact the maintainer with inquiries. Datasources that appear
to be unmaintained and/or unused may be considered for eventual
removal.
```

an example.

Add your datasource name to the built-in list of datasources
------------------------------------------------------------

Add your datasource module name to the end of the ``datasource_list``
entry in :file:`cloudinit/settings.py`.

Add your cloud platform to apport collection prompts
----------------------------------------------------

Update the list of cloud platforms in :file:`cloudinit/apport.py`. This list
will be provided to the user who invokes :command:`ubuntu-bug cloud-init`.

Enable datasource by default in Ubuntu packaging branches
---------------------------------------------------------

Ubuntu packaging branches contain a template file,
:file:`config/cloud.cfg.tmpl`, which ultimately sets the default
``datasource_list`` that is installed by distros that use the upstream
packaging configuration.

Add documentation for your datasource
-------------------------------------

You should add a new file in
:file:`doc/rtd/reference/datasources/<cloudplatform>.rst`
and reference it in
:file:`doc/rtd/reference/datasources.rst`

Benefits of including your datasource in upstream cloud-init
============================================================

> Datasources which are included in upstream cloud-init benefit from ongoing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Datasources included in upstream cloud-init benefit from ongoing
```
